# Audio libraries for Windows

The G3N engine audio support currently depends on the following external libraries:

- `OpenAL`        - for spatial audio
- `libogg`        - for Ogg container format
- `libvorbis`     - for vorbis decoder support
- `libvorbisfile` - for reading/decoding ogg vorbis files

These libraries are easily installed in Linux systems using the distribution package manager.

For Windows you can build these libraries from sources using the following procedure
or if you are a trusting person you can simply use the dlls in this directory which were
built using this procedure.

In any case it is recommended that you copy these dlls to the directory from which will
run your application and avoid copying them to the Windows system directory.

# Guide for building the Windows audio dlls

1. Download and install *Microsoft Studio Community* from https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads/.
   Under the *Workloads* tab, select ***Desktop development with C++***.
   We are assuming here that *Microsoft Studio 2017* will be used. If you are using the previous
   version of *Microsoft Studio* replace *Microsoft Studio 15 2017* by *Microsoft Studio 14 2015*
   in the *CMake* command line in item 5.

2. Download and install *CMake* from https://cmake.org/download/.

3. Download *OpenAL soft* from http://kcat.strangesoft.net/openal-releases/openal-soft-1.17.2.tar.bz2
   and decompress it in a folder. You may need a tool to decompress the file such as http://www.7zip.org.
   Alternatively you can clone the git respository: https://github.com/kcat/openal-soft
   and checkout the latest tagged release:
   ```
   >git checkout tags/openal-soft-1.17.2
   ```

4. Execute the *Developer Command Prompt for VS 2017* (or the equivalent for the 2015 version)
   installed by *Microsoft Visual Studio*.
   It is a command prompt window with environment variables correctly initialized to use
   the MS compiler and tools.

5. In the command prompt navigate to the *build* directory inside the *OpenAL* directory.
   Then execute one the of following commands depending on your platform architecture.
   ```
   >cmake -G "Visual Studio 15 2017 Win64" ..   # To build 64 bit dll OR`
   >cmake -G "Visual Studio 15 2017" ..         # To build 32 bit dll`
   ```
   It is important to check in the messages generated by *CMake* that *OpenAL* will be built
   with support for *DirectSound*.
   If everything is OK, a file named `OpenAL.sln` should have been generated in this
   directory (along with many others).

6. Execute *Visual Studio* and from its menu select *Open -> Project/Solution...*.
   Select the file `OpenAL.sln` generated previously by *CMake*.
   In the *Visual Studio* toolbar, below the menu, select the build mode *Release*. 
   Also in the toolbar select the desired architecture: x64 or Win32.
   Then select *Build -> Build Solution* in the menu to start the build.
   Once the build is complete the file `OpenAL.dll` should have been generated in the directory `build/Release`.
    
7. Download *libogg* and *libvorbis* from https://xiph.org/downloads/.
   We used these versions:
   - http://downloads.xiph.org/releases/ogg/libogg-1.3.2.zip and
   - http://downloads.xiph.org/releases/vorbis/libvorbis-1.3.5.zip

8. Extract both files inside the same directory and rename the two directories to remove the version suffix:
   ```
   rename libogg-1.3.2 libogg
   rename libvorbis-1.3.5 libvorbis
   ```

   It is important for the root directory of both libraries to be in the same directory:
   ```
   + parent_directory
      + libogg
         + doc
         + include
         ...
      + libvorbis
         + doc
         + include
         ...
   ```
   *libvorbis* depends on *libogg* and its build system assumes this directory configuration.

9. Execute *Visual Studio* and from its menu select *Open -> Project/Solution...*.
   Select the file `libogg\win32\VS2010\libogg_dynamic.sln`.
   In the *Visual Studio* toolbar, below the menu, select the build mode *Release*. 
   Also in the toolbar select the desired architecture: x64 or Win32.
   Then select the menu *Build -> Build Solution* to start the build.
   If during the build *Visual Studio* indicates an error related to
   the installed platform toolset you may need to retarget the solution,
   selecting the menu *Project -> Retarget solution"* and then try to build again.
   If everything goes OK then `libogg.dll` should be in the directory:
   `libogg\win32\VS2010\x64\Release` for 64 bits or
   `libogg\win32\VS2010\Win32\Release` for 32 bits.

10. Execute *Visual Studio* and from its menu select *Open -> Project/Solution...*.
   Select the file `libvorbis\win32\VS2010\vorbis_dynamic.sln`.
   In the *Visual Studio* toolbar, below the menu, select the build mode *Release*. 
   Also in the toolbar select the desired architecture: x64 or Win32.
   Then select the menu *Build -> Build Solution* to start the build.
   If during the build *Visual Studio* indicates an error related to
   the installed platform toolset you may need to retarget the solution,
   selecting the menu *Project -> Retarget solution"* and then try the build again.
   If everything goes OK, then `libvorbis.dll` and `libvorbisfile.dll` should be in the directory:
   `libvorbis\win32\VS2010\x64\Release` for 64 bits or
   `libvorbis\win32\VS2010\Win32\Release` for 32 bits.

11. Copy the dlls: `OpenAL32.dll, libogg.dll, libvorbis.dll` and `libvorbisfile.dll`
    to the directory from which you will execute a G3N application.



